ai-muse REFUSED TO START AT ALL in a fresh clone of u2giants/shared-db. Not a bad review,
not a missing verdict -- it never ran a turn.

EXACT SYMPTOM
Single line to stdout, non-zero outcome, no session created, no report written:

  ai-muse: error: refusing Muse reports: .ai/reviews contains tracked files.

CONTEXT AND WHAT I WAS DOING
Orchestrator session claude-20260820-113000Z on shared-db (marker #1308). Albert asked for
Muse's independent recommendation on shared-db issue #1314 -- whether to backfill 133
art-piece records into the live dflow schema or write them off. I cloned the repository
fresh from the GitHub remote (deliberately, not a local-path clone -- see shared-db #1296,
where a local-path clone caused a wrapper to build its evidence packet from the wrong
repository and a reviewer was fed the wrong commit), then invoked ai-muse in that clone.

WHY THE REFUSAL FIRES, AND WHY IT FIRES ON EVERY CLONE
u2giants/shared-db has 25 TRACKED files under .ai/reviews/ (`git ls-files .ai/reviews/ |
wc -l` -> 25), committed before `.ai/reviews/` was added to .gitignore. .gitignore does not
untrack what is already tracked, so the files come down with every checkout. ai-muse's
guard tests for tracked files in that directory and refuses.

Consequence: ai-muse cannot run in ANY fresh clone of this repository. It is not
intermittent and it is not environment-specific -- it will reproduce for every caller on
every machine until the repository's tracked files are resolved.

IS THE GUARD WRONG? NO -- AND THIS IS THE IMPORTANT PART
I do not think ai-muse is misbehaving. Refusing to write a review into a directory that
contains tracked files is defensible: a tracked review file really could be committed by
accident, which is the exact harm the guard exists to prevent. The repository is what is
inconsistent -- its .gitignore declares .ai/reviews/ disposable session scratch while 25
files in it are tracked, several of them added by the commit that introduced the production
review-evidence gate.

So this is filed as a reviewer issue because it makes a rotation reviewer unusable, NOT as
a request to weaken the guard. Please do not "fix" this by removing the tracked-file check.

NOTE THE WRAPPERS DISAGREE WITH EACH OTHER ABOUT THIS DIRECTORY
- ai-grok-review checks only that the directory is GIT-IGNORED. Its check passes in this
  repository today (it probes a file path inside the directory, which resolves the rule
  correctly even when the directory does not exist).
- ai-muse additionally refuses if the directory contains TRACKED FILES -- stricter.
Both positions are reasonable in isolation. The divergence itself is worth a decision:
callers currently cannot predict from one wrapper's success whether another will run.

WORKAROUND USED, and why it is not a fix
In the throwaway clone only, never pushed:
  git rm -r --cached .ai/reviews && rm -rf .ai/reviews
Muse then ran normally and produced a complete, high-quality recommendation with a proper
coverage statement that correctly flagged the five facts it could not verify itself. So the
provider and the wrapper are both healthy once past this guard.
This workaround is not acceptable as standing practice: it requires every future session to
know the trick, and to know the deletion must never be committed.

TIMING
Refusal was immediate -- well under a second, before any provider call. No retry was needed
or made; the second invocation after the workaround succeeded first time.

SUGGESTED FIXES, in preference order
1. Repository side (shared-db #1304): decide whether those 25 files are durable evidence or
   scratch, and make .gitignore and the tracked state agree. This removes the cause.
2. Wrapper side, optional and secondary: make the refusal message actionable by naming the
   offending paths and the exact remedy, e.g. "N tracked files under .ai/reviews (first:
   <path>); this repository tracks review artifacts while .gitignore declares them scratch.
   Resolve in the repository, or run Muse from a checkout without them." The current message
   states the rule but not which files or what to do, so the caller has to go and find out.
3. Consider aligning ai-grok-review and ai-muse on one shared rule for this directory, so a
   caller can predict from one wrapper whether another will run.

RELATED
- shared-db #1304 -- the tracked-vs-ignored contradiction; I had filed it as latent, and
  this occurrence is the evidence that it is now a live blocker.
- shared-db #1296 -- evidence-packet isolation, and the git check-ignore false negative that
  affected ai-grok-review.
- ai-devops docs/reviewer-result-delivery-defects-2026-08-20.md -- the three-reviewer
  result-delivery analysis from earlier the same day.
- shared-db #1290 / cef67d6 -- Muse is one of only THREE reviewers in the active rotation,
  so this removes a third of review capacity in this repository.
